SIP-56 - Proper Specification for Match Types. (#65)
scala/improvement-proposals: content/match-types-spec.md

title: SIP-56 - Proper Specification for Match Types
---

**By: Sébastien Doeraene**

## History

| Date          | Version            |
|---------------|--------------------|
| Aug 11th 2023 | Initial Draft      |

## Summary

Currently, match type reduction is not specified, and its implementation is by nature not specifiable.
This is an issue because match type reduction spans across TASTy files (unlike, for example, type inference or GADTs), which can and will lead to old TASTy files not to be linked again in future versions of the compiler.

This SIP proposes a proper specification for match types, which does not involve type inference.
It is based on `baseType` computations and subtype tests involving only fully-defined types.
That is future-proof, because `baseType` and subtyping are defined in the specification of the language.

The proposed specification defines a subset of current match types that are considered legal.
Legal match types use the new, specified reduction rules.
Illegal match types are rejected, which is a breaking change, and can be recovered under `-source:3.3`.

## Motivation

Currently, match type reduction is implementation-defined.

> Matching a scrutinee type `X` against a pattern `P` with captures `ts` works as follows:

Reviewer: I think it would help many readers to explain at least briefly (and/or with a link) what captures are. Does this have to do with “capture checking”, or is it something else?

1. we create new type variables for the captures `ts'` giving a pattern `P'`,

> 2. we ask the compiler's `TypeComparer` (the type inference black blox) to "try and make it so" that `X <:< P'`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. we ask the compiler's `TypeComparer` (the type inference black box) to "try and make it so" that `X <:< P'`,
```

3. if it manages to do so, we get constraints for `ts'`; we then have a match, and we instantiate the body of the pattern with the received constraints for `ts`.

The problem with this approach is that, by essence, type inference is an unspecified black box.
There are *guidelines* about how it should behave in common cases, but no actual guarantee.
This is fine everywhere else in the language, because what type inference comes up with is stored once and for all in TASTy.
When we read TASTy files, we do not have to perform the work of type inference again; we reuse what was already computed.
When a new version of the compiler changes type inference, it does not change what was computed and stored in TASTy files by previous versions of the compiler.

> For match types, this is a problem, because reduction spans across TASTy file.

Reviewer: > reduction spans across TASTy file

unclear, to me anyway — can you reword/expand to be clearer?

Author: I expanded a bit. Is it better now? Should I go all the way to showing a concrete example?

In order to guarantee compatibility, we must ensure that, for any given match type:

> * if it reduces in a given way in verion 1 of the compiler, it still reduces in the same way in version 2, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* if it reduces in a given way in version 1 of the compiler, it still reduces in the same way in version 2, and
```

> * if it decides disjointness in version 1, it still decides disjointness in version 2.

Reviewer: terse to the point of being a bit cryptic. maybe:

```suggestion
* if it judges two types to be disjoint in version 1, it still makes the same judgment in version 2.
```

but I'm not sure what to suggest because I actually don't know what shade of meaning is intended

Author: I have significantly elaborated those paragraphs. Is it better now?

Reviewer: That seems like a requirement in order to have the "proper specification for match types" the SIP name promises.

> By delegating reduction to the `TypeComparer` black box, it is in practice impossible to guarantee the former.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If reduction is delegated to the `TypeComparer` black box, then it is impossible in practice to guarantee the first property.
```

In order to solve this problem, this SIP provides a specification for match type reduction that is independent of the `TypeComparer` black box.
It defines a subset of match type cases that are considered legal.
Legal cases get a specification for when and how they should reduce for any scrutinee.
Illegal cases are rejected as being outside of the language.

> For compatibility reasons, they can still be accepted with `-source:3.3`; in that case, they reduce using the existing, unspecified (and prone to breakage) implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For compatibility reasons, such now-illegal cases will still be accepted under `-source:3.3`; in that case, they reduce using the existing, unspecified (and prone to breakage) implementation.
```

Reviewer: also, I think it would be good to say something about how long `-source:3.3` might be expected to exist. (Is the “LTS” status of 3.3 relevant...?)

Also, if `-source:3.3` enabled, will such uses still generate warnings, or does that flag flip it directly all the way from "doesn't compile at all" to "compiles it without complaint"?

Reviewer: I think so.

> For legal cases, the proposed reduction specification should reduce in the same way as the current implementation for the majority of cases.

Reviewer: “majority” seems like a pretty weak claim. so, maybe only 51% of cases? I would hope you would be comfortable making a stronger claim such as “the vast majority” or “nearly all”

Author: Yeah that was overly pessimistic of me. We actually did not find any case where it broke, so I made that clearer.

That is however not possible to guarantee, since the existing implementation is not specified in the first place.

## Proposed solution

### High-level overview

> By its nature, this proposal only contains a specification, without any high level overview.

Reviewer: huh? I don't understand this at all. am I missing some context?

Author: There's a section "High-level overview" in the SIP template and I felt compelled to fill it in, but it makes no sense here. The feature already exists and is shipped. I removed the section.

### Specification

#### Syntax

Syntactically, nothing changes.
The way that a pattern is parsed and type captures identified is kept as is.

> Once type captures are identified, we can represent the *abstract* syntax of a pattern as follows:

Reviewer: Why the emphasis on “abstract”? Whatever distinction you're making there, I think you could be more explicitly about what the distinction is and why you're making it here.

Author: I added some references to the spec, which has both concrete syntax and abstract syntax for types. We are talking about the abstract syntax here.

  * If `T` is a concrete type alias to a type lambda:
    * Let `P'` be the beta-reduction of `P`.
    * Compute `matchPattern(P', X, variance, scrutIsWidenedAbstract)`.

#### Disjointness

This proposal does not affect the check for provably disjoint types in match types.
If a case is legal and does not match, the existing disjointness check is used to decide whether we can move on to the next case.

### Compatibility

Compatibility is inherently tricky to evaluate for this proposal, and even to define.
One could argue that, from a pure specification point of view, it breaks nothing since it only specifies things that were unspecified before.
However, that is not very practical.
In practice, this proposal definitely breaks some code that compiled before, due to making some patterns illegal.
In exchange, it promises that all the patterns that are considered legal will keep working in the future; which is not the case with the current implementation, even for the legal subset.

In order to evaluate the practical impact of this proposal, we conducted a quantitative analysis of *all* the match types found in Scala 3 libraries published on Maven Central.

> We used [Scaladex](https://index.scala-lang.org/) to list all Scala 3 libraries, [coursier](https://get-coursier.io/docs/api) to resolve their classpaths, and [tasty-query](https://github.com/scalacenter/tasty-query) to semantically analyze the patterns of all the match types they contain.

Reviewer: 💪 👏

Reviewer 2: 👏

> Out of 4,783 libraries that were found and analyzed, 49 contained at least one match type definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of 4,783 libraries, 49 contained at least one match type definition.
```

  * Those used to be at https://github.com/7mind/idealingua-v1/blob/48d35d53ce1c517f9f0d5341871e48749644c105/idealingua-v1/idealingua-v1-runtime-rpc-http4s/src/main/scala-3/izumi/idealingua/runtime/rpc/http4s/package.scala#L10-L15 but they do not exist in the latest version of the library.
* 1 library used to have 1 `&`-type extractor (which "worked" who knows how?):
  https://github.com/Katrix/perspective/blob/f1643ac7a4e6a0d8b43546bf7b9e6219cc680dde/dotty/derivation/src/main/scala/perspective/derivation/Helpers.scala#L15-L18
  but the author already accepted a change with a workaround at
  https://github.com/Katrix/perspective/pull/1
* 1 library has 3 occurrences of using an abstract type constructor too "concretely":
  https://github.com/kory33/s2mc-test/blob/d27c6e85ad292f8a96d7d51af7ddc87518915149/protocol-core/src/main/scala/io/github/kory33/s2mctest/core/generic/compiletime/Tuple.scala#L16
  defined at https://github.com/kory33/s2mc-test/blob/d27c6e85ad292f8a96d7d51af7ddc87518915149/protocol-core/src/main/scala/io/github/kory33/s2mctest/core/generic/compiletime/Generic.scala#L12
  It could be replaced by a concrete `class Lock[A](phantom: A)` instead.

> The only case for which there exists no workaround that we know of is the extractor for `scala.Enumeration`-based `Value` classes.

Reviewer: So. Should we be concerned? You think this... entirely acceptable, probably acceptable, probably a blocker that needs to be resolved?

I am curious what your own opinion is, but I'm also interested in having a bit more assistance in formulating my own opinion. What is this, what is the fundamental issue here?

Author: I found a workaround in the meantime, though I had to allow matching class members with type member extractors. I added a commit with those changes.

```scala
type IsSeq[t <: Seq[Any]] = t
InverseMap[X, IsSeq]
```
which gives
```scala
case IsSeq[x] *: t => x *: InverseMap[t, IsSeq]
```

These instantiatiations happen deep inside the type checker, during type computations.
Since types are cached, shared and reused in several parts of the program, by construction, we do not have any source code position information at that point.
That means that we cannot report *warnings*.

We can in fact report *errors* by reducing to a so-called `ErrorType`, which is aggressively propagated.
This is what we do in the proposed implementation (unless using `-source:3.3`).

### Open questions

None at this point.

## Alternatives

The specification is more complicated than we initially wanted.
At the beginning, we were hoping that we could restrict match cases to class type constructors only.
The quantitative study however revealed that we had to introduce support for abstract type constructors and for type member extractors.

As already mentioned, the standard library itself contains an occurrence of an abstract type constructor in a pattern.

> Making that an error would mean declaring the standard library itself bankrupt, which was not a viable option.

Reviewer: “bankrupt” is a colorful metaphor here, but I'm left wondering what underlying literal meaning is intended. like, we'd need to make an incompatible change to the standard library that would break some code? (how much code? compile-time breakage, runtime breakage?) is making such a change impossible? highly undesirable? at least somewhat undesirable?

> We tried to restrict abstract type constructor to never match on their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We tried to restrict abstract type constructors to never match on their own.
```

> Instead, we wanted them to stay *stuck* until they could be instantiated to a concrete type constructor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, we wanted them to stay “stuck” until they could be instantiated to a concrete type constructor.
```

However, that led some existing tests to fail even for match types that were declared legal, because they did not reduce anymore in some places where they reduced before.

Type member extractors are our biggest pain point.
Their specification is complicated, and the implementation as well.

> Our quantitative study showed that they were however "often" used (10 occurrences spread over 4 libraries).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our quantitative study showed that they were however used at least somewhat often (10 occurrences spread over 4 libraries).
```

In each case, they seem to be a way to express what Scala 2 type projections (`A#T`) could express.

> While not quite as powerful as type projections (which were shown to be unsound), match types with type member extractors delay things enough for actual use cases to be meaningful.

Reviewer: @dwjinand you might have something to say about this? I know it's come up repeatedly in our discussions about match types that it's possible to use them to smuggle in something akin to abstract type projections.

Author: > something akin to abstract type projections

With the proposed spec, only *concrete* type projections actually make it. As long as it's abstract, `ExtractTOf[A]` cannot reduce to `T` like `A#T` does. The difference is that `A#T` has the "best" *bounds* of `T` in `A`, whereas `ExtractTOf[A]` has only the match type's bound as long as `T` is not concrete (through subsequent substitution of `A` by something more precise in which `T` is a type alias whose rhs does not depend on its prefix).

For example,
```scala
class Base {
  type T
  def someT: T = ???
}

type ExtractTOfAux[A] = Base { type T = A }
type ExtractTOf[X <: Base] = X match
  case ExtractTOfAux[t] => t

// Scala 2 abstract type projection, works
def fooOfBaseProj[B <: Base](b: B): B#T = b.someT

// Scala 3 match type extractor: does not work because the match type does not reduce
// as T is not concrete in B.
def fooOfBaseMT[B <: Base](b: B): ExtractTOf[B] = b.someT
```

The match-type-based type member extractor still features enough power because you can "carry around" values of that type, and at the edge your `B` becomes concrete enough that you can reduce. This is what happens with `scala.Enumeration`s.

IMO, people should not use that. It's all a hack. Instead, we should use path-dependent types with actual values of the enclosing class. For example the proper definition of `fooOfBase` is:
```scala
def fooOfBasePathDep(b: Base): b.T = b.someT
```
Unfortunately, people have been using type projections/type member extractors instead. Yes, sometimes it avoids one extra layer of nesting: if you need a class that `extends Foo[b.type]`, you would `b` to be declared one level up, and so that class needs to be nested in another class that has a `b` field. This is why the json4s workaround is what it is, instead of turning it into path-dependent types. The correct solution would be to have
```scala
class EnumSerializers(val enumeration: Enumeration) {
  class EnumSerializer extends Serializer(enumeration.Value) {
    ...
  }
}
```
but that would have changed the public API, so it was not an acceptable PR to make.

> As far as we know, those use cases have no workaround if we make type member extractors illegal.

Author: Hum no, the sentence says: if we remove type member extractors *from the proposed spec*, then we will have no workaround anymore. With the proposed spec, we can extract type members.

The originally submitted SIP/spec did not allow to extract the type member of `SomeEnumeration#Value` because `Value` is a *class* member (not a type alias), but the commit "Allow class members to be matched by type member extractors." made that actually possible.

> As far as we know, those use cases have no workaround if we make type member extractors illegal.

Reviewer 3: OK thanks for the clarification!

## Related work

> This section should list prior work related to the proposal, notably:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notable prior work related to this proposal includes:
```

MatchTypeSubPattern ::= TypeCapture
                      | TypeWithoutCapture
                      | MatchTypeAppliedPattern

TypeCapture ::= NamedTypeCapture    // e.g., `t`
              | WildcardTypeCapture // `_` (with inferred bounds)
```

In the concrete syntax, `MatchTypeAppliedPattern`s can take the form of `InfixType`s.
A common example is `case h *: t =>`, which is desugared into `case *:[h, t] =>`.

The cases `MatchTypeAppliedPattern` are only chosen if they contain at least one `TypeCapture`.
Otherwise, they are considered `TypeWithoutCapture` instead.
Each named capture appears exactly once.

#### Legal patterns

A `MatchTypePattern` is legal if and only if one of the following is true:

* It is a `TypeWithoutCapture`, or
* It is a `MatchTypeAppliedPattern` with a legal `TyconWithoutCapture` and each of its arguments is either:
  * A `TypeCapture`, or
  * A `TypeWithoutCapture`, or
  * The type constructor is *covariant* in that parameter, and the argument is recursively a legal `MatchTypeAppliedPattern`.

A `TyconWithoutCapture` is legal if one of the following is true:

* It is a *class* type constructor, or

> * It is the `scala.compiletime.ops.int.S` type constructor, or

Reviewer 4: shouldn't this also cover `compiletime.ops.long.S` [Source code](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/blob/3.3.0/library/src/scala/compiletime/ops/long.scala#L18)

Author: Perhaps, if we ignore the fact that [scala.compiletime.ops.long.S doesn't work](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues/18342) :man_shrugging:

Author: `long.S` was [officially deprecated](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/pull/18426), so this is not an issue anymore.

  * A `TypeCapture`, or
  * A `TypeWithoutCapture`, or
  * The type constructor is *covariant* in that parameter, and the argument is recursively a legal `MatchTypeAppliedPattern`.

A `TyconWithoutCapture` is legal if one of the following is true:

* It is a *class* type constructor, or
* It is the `scala.compiletime.ops.int.S` type constructor, or
* It is an *abstract* type constructor, or
* It is a refined type of the form `Base { type Y = t }` where:
  * `Base` is a `TypeWithoutCapture`,
  * There exists a type member `Y` in `Base`, and
  * `t` is a `TypeCapture`.
* It is a type alias to a type lambda such that:
  * Its bounds contain all possible values of its arguments, and
  * When applied to the type arguments, it beta-reduces to a new legal `MatchTypeAppliedPattern` that contains exactly one instance of every type capture present in the type arguments.

#### Examples of legal patterns

Given the following definitions:

```scala
class Inv[A]
class Cov[+A]
class Contra[-A]

class Base {
  type Y
}

type YExtractor[t] = Base { type Y = t }
type ZExtractor[t] = Base { type Z = t }

> type IsSeq[t <: Seq[Any]] = t

Reviewer 5: How do we express something similar with the new algorithm?

* `{ type A = Int; type B = Int }` and `{ type B = String; type A = String }` (switching the order of type members)
* `{ type A = Int }` and class `C` that defines a member `type A = String`.

Therefore, we drop the very ad hoc case of one-to-one type member refinements.

On to the specification.

A scrutinee `X` is *provably disjoint* from a pattern `P` iff it is provably disjoint from the type `P'` obtained by replacing every type capture in `P` by a wildcard type argument with the same bounds.

We note `X ⋔ Y` to say that `X` and `Y` are provably disjoint.
Intuitively, that notion is based on the following properties of the Scala language:

* Single inheritance of classes
* Final classes cannot be extended
* Sealed traits have a known set of direct children
* Constant types with distinct values are nonintersecting
* Singleton paths to distinct `enum` case values are nonintersecting

However, a precise definition of provably-disjoint is complicated and requires some helpers.
We start with the notion of "simple types", which are a minimal subset of Scala types that capture the concepts mentioned above.

A "simple type" is one of:

* `Nothing`
* `AnyKind`

> * `p.C[...Xi]` a possibly parameterized class type, where `p` and `...Xi` are arbitrary types (not just simple types)

Reviewer 4: I propose to treat `scala.compiletime.ops.int.S` as a parameterised class type for purposes of disjointness. Then will it will be considered disjoint to `0` and any other negative integer literal?

Author: I don't think we can pretend that it is a parameterized class type. It is not. For one thing, its existence would invalidate the `final` status of `scala.Int`, which then prevents `Int` from being disjoint from other traits, although currently it is.

If we want to add `S[n]` here, it needs to have its own category, and all the rules (and proof) need to be adapted to account for it.

* `c` a literal type
* `p.C.x` where `C` is an `enum` class and `x` is one of its value `case`s
* `X₁ & X₂` where `X₁` and `X₂` are both simple types
* `X₁ | X₂` where `X₁` and `X₂` are both simple types
* `[...ai] =>> X₁` where `X₁` is a simple type

> We define `⌈X⌉` a function from a full Scala type to a simple type.

Reviewer 6: How do you say `⌈`?

Author: Its real name can probably be "ceil", which is its name in math as the approximation towards positive infinity.

I call it "up" in my head, for some reason.

* `⌈X⌉ = ⌈H⌉` if `X` is a non-class type designator with upper bound `H`
* `⌈X⌉ = ⌈η(X)⌉` if `X` is a polymorphic class type designator, where `η(X)` is its eta-expansion
* `⌈X⌉ = ⌈Y⌉` if `X` is a match type that reduces to `Y`
* `⌈X⌉ = ⌈H⌉` if `X` is a match type that does not reduce and `H` is its upper bound
* `⌈X[...Ti]⌉ = ⌈Y⌉` where `Y` is the beta-reduction of `X[...Ti]` if `X` is a type lambda
* `⌈X[...Ti]⌉ = ⌈⌈X⌉[...Ti⌉` if `X` is neither a type lambda nor a class type designator
* `⌈X @a⌉ = ⌈X⌉`
* `⌈X { R }⌉ = ⌈X⌉`
* `⌈{ α => X } = ⌈X⌉⌉`
* `⌈X₁ & X₂⌉ = ⌈X₁⌉ & ⌈X₂⌉`
* `⌈X₁ | X₂⌉ = ⌈X₁⌉ | ⌈X₂⌉`
* `⌈[...ai] =>> X₁⌉ = [...ai] =>> ⌈X₁⌉`

The following properties hold about `⌈X⌉` (we have paper proofs for those):

* `X <: ⌈X⌉` for all type `X`.
* If `S <: T`, and the subtyping derivation does not use the "lower-bound rule" of `<:` anywhere, then `⌈S⌉ <: ⌈T⌉`.

The "lower-bound rule" states that `S <: T` if `T = q.X `and `q.X` is a non-class type designator and `S <: L` where `L` is the lower bound of the underlying type definition of `q.X`".
That rule is known to break transitivy of subtyping in Scala already.

> Second, we define the relation `⋔` on *classes* (including traits and hidden classes of objects) as:

Reviewer 6: "hidden classes of objects" means module classes?

Author: Yes.

  * `p.C.x ⋔ q.D.y` if `C != D` or `x != y`
* Two literal types are disjoint if they are different:
  * `c ⋔ d` if `c != d`
* An `enum` value case is always disjoint from a literal type:
  * `c ⋔ q.D.y`
  * `p.C.x ⋔ d`
* An `enum` value case or a constant is disjoint from a class type if it does not extend that class (because it's essentially final):
  * `p.C.x ⋔ q.D[...Ti]` if `baseType(p.C.x, D)` is not defined
  * `p.C[...Si] ⋔ q.D.y` if `baseType(q.D.y, C)` is not defined
  * `c ⋔ q.D[...Ti]` if `baseType(c, D)` is not defined
  * `p.C[...Si] ⋔ d` if `baseType(d, C)` is not defined
* Two class types are disjoint if the classes themselves are disjoint, or if there exist a common super type with conflicting type arguments.
  * `p.C[...Si] ⋔ q.D[...Ti]` if `C ⋔ D`
  * `p.C[...Si] ⋔ q.D[...Ti]` if there exists a class `E` such that `baseType(p.C[...Si], E) = a.E[...Ai]` and `baseType(q.D[...Ti], E) = b.E[...Bi]` and there exists a pair `(Ai, Bi)` such that
    * `Ai ⋔ Bi` and it is in invariant position, or
    * `Ai ⋔ Bi` and it is in covariant position and there exists a field of that type parameter in `E`

> It is worth noting that this definition disregards prefixes entirely.

Reviewer 6: Disregards _differing_ prefixes?  Just to be clear that not all prefixes are disregarded.
